KEP-3008: QoS-class resources (#3004)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/3008-cri-class-based-resources/README.md

            // Allocatable represents the resources of a node that are available for scheduling.
            // Defaults to Capacity.
            // +optional
            Allocatable ResourceList `json:"allocatable,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,rep,name=allocatable,casttype=ResourceList,castkey=ResourceName"`
   +        // ResourceClasses lists the available
   +        ClassResourdes []ClassResourceList
   +
   +type ClassResourceList {
   +        // Name of the resource
   +        Name ClassResourceName
   +        // Classes available in the resource
   +        Classes []string
   +}
   ```
1. Separate API objects (e.g. something like `RuntimeClass`). Doesn't
   necessarily that neatly align with two level hierarchy (resource name and a
   set of classes within). Also, only best suited to homogenous clusters.

#### Resource discovery

Some possible alternatives.

1. Reported by the container runtime. Container runtime is (or at least should
   be) aware of all resource types and the classes within. It could advertise
   the resources e.g. via either:

>    1. A separate gRPC endpoint or update `StatusResponse

Reviewer: Is this section missing a backtick?
```suggestion
   1. A separate gRPC endpoint or update `StatusResponse`
```

useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

We would like to add support for class-based resources in Kubernetes.
Class-based resources can be thought of as non-accountable resources, each of
which is presented by a set of classes. Being non-accountable means that
multiple containers can be assigned to the same class. They are also supposed
to be opaque to the CRI client in the sense that the container runtime takes
care of configuration and control of the resources and the classes within.

A prime example of a class-based resource is Intel RDT (Resource Director
Technology). RDT is a technology for controlling the cache lines and memory
bandwidth available to applications. RDT provides a class-based approach for

> QoS control of these shared resources: all processes in the same hardware class

Reviewer 2: is there any assumption about classes precedence order? For example, will users desire the scenario when they tell "at least bronze", but if "golden" available - take this one?

Reviewer 2: does it make sense from the hardware description of classes perspective? Or classes are typically defined in some orthogonal dimensions that cannot be linearly ordered from worst to the best?

Author: Another good question. I think in general case you cannot assume any ordering from "worst" to "best". E.g. in the case of RDT you might have two classes (say  hi-A and hi-B) with exactly the same amount of cache lines for both of the classes, but reserved exclusively i.e. the cache lines would not overlap. So they could be equally good but interference between apps in different classes would be minimized (in terms of cache).

classes are then made available for CRI clients.

Currently, there is no mechanism in Kubernetes to use these types of resources
. CRI-O and containerd runtimes have support for RDT and blockio classes and
they provide an bridge-gap user interface through special pod annotations. We
would like to eventually get these types of resources first class citizen and
properly supported in Kubernetes, providing visibility, a well-defined user
interface, and permission controls.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Make it possible to request class resources
  - Support RDT class assignment of containers. This is already supported by
    the containerd and CRI-O runtime and part of the OCI runtime-spec
  - Support blockio class assignment of containers.
- Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other class-based
  resource types in the future.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Interface for configuring the class-based resources.

> - Enumerating possible (class) resource types or their detailed behavior

Reviewer 2: some behavior agreements are needed I think. Do we assume they are immutable? Or kubelet needs to have a way to find out that certain resource class is not available any longer and pod has to be deleted? This may affect CRI API design

  resource discovery and status.
- Keeping client (kubelet) and runtime in sync wrt to available classes. Will
  be addressed in future KEP about resource discovery.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

Configuration and management of the class resources is fully handled by the
underlying container runtime and is invisible to kubelet. An error to the CRI
client is returned if the specified class is not available.

### CRI protocol

The following additions to the CRI protocol are suggested.

The `ContainerConfig` message will be supplemented with new `class_resources`
field, providing per-container setting for class resources.

```diff
 message ContainerConfig {

 ...
     // Configuration specific to Linux containers.
     LinuxContainerConfig linux = 15;
     // Configuration specific to Windows containers.
     WindowsContainerConfig windows = 16;
+
+    // Configuration of class resources.

> +    ContainerClassResources class_resources = 17;

Reviewer 2: with the work on InPlace update of CPU and Memory, will classes be needed to be in-place updated in future? Will the need for this change the proposed API surface?

Author: This is a good note that I already touched in one of the previous comments. Yes, I think we should prepare for this in the CRI API now (even if it wouldn't work because of runtime limitations at present). I haven't updated the KEP yet to reflect this as I want to check the details

Reviewer 3: I think it's reasonable to leave support out until we have a valid use case. Kubelet has a lot of knowledge of information for InPlace to be enabled, and that's against the design decisions here. I think it's reasonable as developers to say: if folks want in place upgrade support, it has to have a first-class QoS field

Reviewer 2: @vinaykul is the InPlace update today has a single setting whether resource can be applied without container restart? Or this can/should be per-resource. If we will start updating QoS in-place, those classes likely will not need a restart while memory/CPU will.

Author: In the proposal, the Mutable field in the QoSResourceInfo CRI message (and corresponding field in the QoSResourceInfo type in the K8s API) is intended to indicate whether a specific QoS resource can be updated in-place, without restart. @vinaykul any comments on this?

 }

+// ContainerClassResources specifies the configuration of class based
+// resources of a container.
+message ContainerClassResources {
+    // Resource classes of the container will be assigned to

> +    map<string, string> classes = 1;

Reviewer 2: in the proposal for pod changes resources are forming list. Here are resources are in the map. What is your thinking on which layer will in future validate the names uniquiness?

Author: Hmm, what list are you referring to? 🧐 The assignment should be map everywhere. In resource discovery/status there are lists. I think we could use only maps everywhere or only lists everywhere. The reason for me using map in the assignment part was to follow existing "style" with other resources. In resource discovery/status part I used lists to follow the api convention to prefer lists (of named subobjects) over maps.

Regarding validating duplicates, maps of course have that property by nature. If we would use lists in the Pod spec I think it would be the "standard" validation package. Regarding CRI API, I haven't really thought about that other that logging a warning if duplicates are detected (and using the last one).

Author: @SergeyKanzhelev the API(s) in the proposal have changed from using maps to lists. In case of Kubernetes api the apiserver (validation) will be responsible for that.

> +    map<string, string> classes = 1;

Author: Heh, it was deliberately this way to "force" it to be opaque 🙄 I sort of copied the design of extended resources. But this is (another) valid question and I'm totally open to rethink it. Maybe we should not paint us in the corner here but allow for future extensions, e.g. specifying some extra attributes e.g. (immutable/mutable or smth).

> +    map<string, string> classes = 1;

Reviewer 4: Relatedly -- what do the key and value here represent here? I assume the key would be the class name, but what is the value? Or is the key something else and the value is the class name?

> +    map<string, string> classes = 1;

Author: @SergeyKanzhelev in the recent proposal a separate extendable message `ContainerQOSResource` is used

```diff
+    // Configuration of QoS resources.
+    repeated ContainerQOSResource qos_resources = 17;
```

#### Pod QoS class

The Pod QoS class could be communicated to the container runtime as a class
resource, too. This information is currently internal to kubelet. However,
container runtimes (CRI-O, at least) are already depending on this information
and currently determining it indirectly by evaluating other CRI parameters. It
would be better to explicitly state the Pod QoS class and class resources would
look like a logical place for that. This also makes it techically possible to
have container-specific QoS classes (as a possible future enhancement of K8s).

Communicating Pod QoS class via class resources would advocate moving class
resources up to `ContainerConfig`.

Making this change, it would also be possible to separate `oom_score_adj` from
the pod qos class in the future.  The runtime could provide a set of OOM
classes, making it possible for the user to specify a burstable pod with low
oom priority (low chance of being killed).

#### Default class

A mechanism for indicating that the (runtime) default class should be used. The
default class would/should be a node/runtime specific attribute. How should
this be specified in the CRI protocol/`cri-api` and Pod spec?

> ### Future work

Reviewer 2: this section is extremely important for the KEP understanding. I'd suggest to put it on top after motivation. Same as we did in user namespaces KEP - outline the roadmap first and then stages

Author: K, got that. I moved "Future work" upwards, under a new "Implementation phases" section (copied that from #127).

+    Classes map[ClassResourceName]string
}

+// ClassResourceName is the name of a class-based resource.
+type ClassResourceName string
```

Also, we add a `Resources` field to the `PodSpec`. We will re-use the existing
`ResourceRequirements` type but Limits and Requests must be left empty. Classes
may be set and they represent the Pod-level assignment of class resources,
comparable to the PodClassResources message in PodSandboxConfig in the CRI API.

```diff
 type PodSpec struct {
@@ -224,4 +224,8 @@ type PodSpec struct {
     // Default to false.
     // +optional
     SetHostnameAsFQDN *bool `json:"setHostnameAsFQDN,omitempty" protobuf:"varint,35,opt,name=setHostnameAsFQDN"`
+    // Pod-level resources. Currently, requests and limits are not allowed
+    // to be specified for pods.
+    // +optional
+    Resources ResourceRequirements
 }
```

In practice, the class resource information will be directly used in the CRI
ContainerConfig (e.g.  CreateContainerRequest message). At this point, without
resource discovery or access control kubelet does not do any validity checking
of the values. Invalid class assignments will cause an error in the container

> runtime.

Reviewer 2: in admission controller or on pod creation? Will it get into the state similar to ImagePullBackoff or it will infinitely retry?

This question may look like implementaiton detail, but what I really want to understand is the mutability of resource classes

Author: It would result in CreateContainerError with infinitely retry (if I understand kubelet's behavior correctly).

Author: @SergeyKanzhelev closing this as outdated. The new proposal contains kubelet admission checks already in the first implementation phase

interface, and permission controls.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Make it possible to request class resources
  - Support RDT class assignment of containers. This is already supported by
    the containerd and CRI-O runtime and part of the OCI runtime-spec
  - Support blockio class assignment of containers.
- Make the extensions flexible, enabling simple addition of other class-based
  resource types in the future.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Interface or mechanism for configuring the class resources (responsibility of
  the container runtime).
- Enumerating possible (class) resource types or their detailed behavior
- Resource status/capacity (will be addressed in a separate KEP)
- Discovery of the class-based resources (will be addressed in a separate KEP)
- Access control (will be addressed in a separate KEP)

## Implementation phases

We have split the full implementation of class resources into multiple phases,

> building functionality gradually, step-bu-step. The goal is to make the

Reviewer 3: nit: step-by-step*

Author: Thx, fixed!

discussions more focused and easier. We may also learn on the way, insights
from earlier phases affecting design choises made in the later phases,
hopefully resulting in a better overall end result. However, we also outline

> all the future steps to not loose the overall big picture.

Reviewer 3: nit: lose*

            // Allocatable represents the resources of a node that are available for scheduling.
            // Defaults to Capacity.
            // +optional
            Allocatable ResourceList `json:"allocatable,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,rep,name=allocatable,casttype=ResourceList,castkey=ResourceName"`
   +        // ResourceClasses lists the available
   +        ClassResourdes []ClassResourceList
   +
   +type ClassResourceList {
   +        // Name of the resource
   +        Name ClassResourceName
   +        // Classes available in the resource
   +        Classes []string
   +}
   ```
1. Separate API objects (e.g. something like `RuntimeClass`). Doesn't
   necessarily that neatly align with two level hierarchy (resource name and a
   set of classes within). Also, only best suited to homogenous clusters.

#### Resource discovery

Some possible alternatives.

1. Reported by the container runtime. Container runtime is (or at least should
   be) aware of all resource types and the classes within. It could advertise
   the resources e.g. via either:

>    1. A separate gRPC endpoint or update `StatusResponse`

Reviewer 3: as a note of preference, this seems more idiomatic for how the cri behaves today

Reviewer 3: I can't see the note (to the point where I almost posted the exact same note as I did three months ago :) ). Maybe update the list to highlight the current direction, and add in the `alternatives` section below some alternatives to it?

and make progress.
-->

- Interface or mechanism for configuring the QoS-class resources (responsibility of
  the container runtime).
- Enumerating possible (QoS-class) resource types or their detailed behavior
- Resource status/capacity (will be addressed in a separate KEP)
- Discovery of the QoS-class resources (will be addressed in a separate KEP)
- Access control (will be addressed in a separate KEP)

## Implementation phases

We have split the full implementation of QoS-class resources into multiple phases,
building functionality gradually, step-by-step. The goal is to make the
discussions more focused and easier. We may also learn on the way, insights
from earlier phases affecting design choises made in the later phases,
hopefully resulting in a better overall end result. However, we also outline
all the future steps to not lose the overall big picture.

### Phase 1

This KEP (the [Proposal](#proposal)) implements the first phase. The goal is to
enable a bare minimum for users to leverage QoS-class resources and start
experimenting with them in Kubernetes:

- extend the CRI protocol to allow QoS-class resource assignment and updates

> - implement pod annotations as an initial user interface

Author: Got that, thanks

> - implement pod annotations as an initial user interface

Author: no annotations in the proposal anymore -> "fixed"

are currently out of the scope of this KEP and were listed under
[Non-goals](#non-goals).

#### Pod Spec

Replace pod annotations with proper user interface via the Pod spec. Below, one
possible option is presented.

Introduce a new field (e.g. class) into ResourceRequirements of Container.

```diff
// ResourceRequirements describes the compute resource requirements.
type ResourceRequirements struct {
     // Limits describes the maximum amount of compute resources allowed.
     Limits ResourceList `json:"limits,omitempty"
     // Requests describes the minimum amount of compute resources required.
     Requests ResourceList `json:"requests,omitempty"
+    // Classes specifies the QoS-class resources that the container should be assigned
+    Classes map[ClassResourceName]string
}

+// ClassResourceName is the name of a QoS-class resource.
+type ClassResourceName string
```

Also, we add a `Resources` field to the `PodSpec`. We will re-use the existing
`ResourceRequirements` type but Limits and Requests must be left empty. Classes
may be set and they represent the Pod-level assignment of QoS-class resources,

> comparable to the PodClassResources message in PodSandboxConfig in the CRI API.

Author: Good point, done (added a reference to #1592). Thanks for pointing this out. I had forgotten about that KEP although I was looking at that around the time I was writing the first draft of this kep 🙄

     // If not specified, the quota matches all objects.
     Scopes []ResourceQuotaScope 
     // scopeSelector is also a collection of filters like scopes that must match each
     // object tracked by a quota but expressed using ScopeSelectorOperator in combination
     // with possible values.
     ScopeSelector *ScopeSelector
+    // AllowedClasses specifies the list of allowed classes for each QoS-class resource
+    AllowedClasses map[ClassResourceName]ResourceClassList
}

+// ResourceClassList is a list of classes of a specific type of QoS-class resource.
+type ResourceClassList []string
```
## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We extend the CRI protocol to contain information about the QoS-class
resource assignment of containers.  Currently we identify two types of

> resources (RDT and blockio) but the API changes will be generic so that it that

Author: Extra that removed

will serve other similar resources in the future.

We also extend the CRI protocol to support updates of QoS-class resource
assignment of running containers. We recognize that currently container
runtimes lack the capability to update either of the two types of QoS-class
resources we have identified (RDT and blockio). However, there is no technical
limitation in that and we are planning to implement update support for them
in the future.

We implement pod annotations the initial mechanism for Kubernetes users to
control QoS-class resource assignment. We define two QoS-class resources that can be
controlled via annotations, i.e. RDT and blockio.

We introduce a feature gate that enables kubelet to interpret pod annotations

> for controlling the RDT and blockio class of containers.

Reviewer 5: I think we can avoid having the kubelet look at the annotations and pass them opaquely to the runtime for phase 1.

> for controlling the RDT and blockio class of containers.

Author: no annotations anymore in the kep -> "solved"

- Allowing time for feedback

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component be upgraded and downgraded? Make sure
this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing an upgrade/downgrade strategy for this
enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

> ## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

Reviewer 6: Looks like you're still iterating on the design, but if you want to get this in 1.25 you'll also need to answer these questions for PRR.

Author: Now filled in the gaps there (I hope I captured it in enough detail)

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> We would like to add support for QoS-class resources in Kubernetes.
> QoS-class resources can be thought of as non-accountable resources, each of
> which is presented by a set of classes. Being non-accountable means that
> multiple containers can be assigned to the same class. They are also supposed
> to be opaque to the CRI client in the sense that the container runtime takes
> care of configuration and control of the resources and the classes within.

Reviewer 7: Here's my summary based on what I think this KEP is about:
```suggestion
Add support to Kubernetes for declaring _quality-of-service_ resources, and assigning these
to Pods.
A quality-of-service (QoS-class) resource is similar to fundamental Kubernetes resource types
such as `cpu` and `memory`, because you can assign that resource to a Pod or to a particular
container. However, QoS-class resources are also different from those fundamental resources
because they are used to assign _sharing_, rather than to declare a specific amount of capacity
that is allocated.

With QoS-class resources, two different Pods can declare that their processes should be tagged
with the same opaque QoS-class identifier for some particular sharing mechanism, such as block
I/O bandwidth. A third Pod can declare a different QoS-class identifier.

The underlying kubelet identifies the sharing preference and instructs the node kernel to place
the processes in appropriate sharing groups. The cluster administrator is responsible for making
sure that a Pod doesn't request membership of a resource sharing group that the Pod should
not claim.
```

Reviewer 7: Sure, fine.

A prime example of a QoS-class resource is Intel RDT (Resource Director
Technology). RDT is a technology for controlling the cache lines and memory
bandwidth available to applications. RDT provides a class-based approach for
QoS control of these shared resources: all processes in the same hardware class
share a portion of cache lines and memory bandwidth.

We also believe that the Linux Block IO controller (cgroup) should be handled
as a QoS-class resource on the level of container orchestration. This enables
configuring I/O scheduler priority and throttling I/O bandwidth per workload.
Having the support for QoS-class resources in place, it will provide a
framework for the future, for instance class-based network or memory type

> prioritization.

Reviewer 7: I'd omit all of:

> We also believe that the Linux Block IO controller (cgroup) should be handled as a QoS-class resource on the level of container orchestration. This enables configuring I/O scheduler priority and throttling I/O bandwidth per workload. Having the support for QoS-class resources in place, it will provide a framework for the future, for instance class-based network or memory type prioritization.

from the KEP summary, Try to keep the KEP summary short.

Author: Removed. Moved some of that to **Motivation**

We have identified the need for both container-level and pod-level QoS-class
resources as independent concepts. Intel RDT (above) is per-container by
design because of the hardware implementation (the control/class hiearchy is
flat). Also, the current support for blockio is container-level only (it is not
possible to configure pod sandbox-level cgroup parameters). However, we have
plans for implementing configuration of sandbox-level blockio parameters. Other
usage for pod sandbox-level QoS-class resources would be communicating the

> Kubernetes Pod QoS class from kubelet to the container runtime.

Reviewer 7: This isn't at all easy to understand. From a SIG Docs point of view, I recommend that we explicitly gate graduation to beta on having good concept documentation to explain what these things are.

Also, I recommend avoiding “we” because it's not clear who “we” represents. I'd guess Intel, but I don't really know.

Author: I did a major overhaul of the summary, shortening it and adapting in your suggestions. Removed the word "we" (from some other parts of the doc, too)

Reviewer 7: Thanks.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

> RDT implements a class-based mechanism for controlling the cache and memory

Reviewer 7: What's RDT?  Maybe hyperlink to it, or repeat the explanation from earlier.

Author: Good point. I added a hyperlink (and for the linux resctrl interface, too)

+       // ClassResourceBlockio is the name of the blockio QoS-class resource
+       ClassResourceBlockio = "blockio"
+)
```

### Pod annotations

Use Pod annotation as the initial K8s user interface, similar to e.g. how
seccomp support was added. This will bridge the gap between enabling
QoS-class resources in the CRI protocol and making them available in the Pod
spec.

A feature gate ClassResources enables kubelet to look for pod
annotations and set the QoS-class resource assignment via CRI protocol accordingly.

Specifically, kubelet will support annotations for specifying RDT and blockio
class, the two types of QoS-class resources that already have basic support in the
container runtimes.

  class for all containers
- `rdt.resources.beta.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default RDT
  class for all containers
- `rdt.resources.beta.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for
  container-specific RDT class settings
  blockio class for all containers
- `blockio.resources.beta.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default
  blockio class for all containers
- `blockio.resources.beta.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for

>   container-specific blockio class settings

Reviewer 7: I've also seen these annotation names suggested:

- `rdt.resources.beta.kubernetes.io/pod` 
- `rdt.resources.beta.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` 
- `blockio.resources.beta.kubernetes.io/pod`
- `blockio.resources.beta.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>`

1. There's a lot of cardinality or whatever here. Any control plane measure to index annotations by key is liable to have a lot of different keys to think about.
2. I thought we didn't put the `beta` bit in the key any more.
3. How come these are beta? The KEP has yet to reach alpha.

Author: Will mark this as resolved as annoations have been dropped from the KEP

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

This enhancement proposal aims at improving the quality of service of
applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control
mechanism. Certain types of resources are inherently shared by application (e.g.
cache, memory bandwidth and disk I/O) and while there are technologies for
controlling these, there is currently no meaningful way in Kubernetes to
support those tehcnologies. This proposal suggests to address the issue above
in a generalized way by extending the Kubernetes resource model with a new type
of resources, i.e. QoS-class resources.

[Intel RDT][intel-rdt] implements a class-based mechanism for controlling the
cache and memory bandwidth QoS of applications. All processes in the same
hardware class share a portion of cache lines and memory bandwidth. RDT

> proveides a way for mitigating noisy neighbors and fulfilling SLAs. In Linux

Reviewer 3: nit: provides*

Author: Thanks, fixed.

- implement pod annotations as an initial user interface
- introduce a feature gate for enabling QoS-class resource support in kubelet

### Future work

This section sheds light on the end goal of this work in order to better
evaluate this KEP in a broader context. What a fully working solution would
consists of and what the (next) steps to accomplish that would be. These topics
are currently out of the scope of this KEP and were listed under
[Non-goals](#non-goals).

#### Pod Spec

Replace pod annotations with proper user interface via the Pod spec. Below, one
possible option is presented.

Introduce a new field (e.g. class) into ResourceRequirements of Container.

```diff
// ResourceRequirements describes the compute resource requirements.
type ResourceRequirements struct {
     // Limits describes the maximum amount of compute resources allowed.
     Limits ResourceList `json:"limits,omitempty"
     // Requests describes the minimum amount of compute resources required.
     Requests ResourceList `json:"requests,omitempty"
+    // Classes specifies the QoS-class resources that the container should be assigned

> +    Classes map[ClassResourceName]string

Reviewer 3: can containers in the same pod have different classes? do we need to specify a `Resources` field in the PodSpec if the answer is no?

Author: Different containers definitely can have different classes (think about e.g. a high priority main workload plus a log handler).

The container-level and pod-level (qos-class) resources are now totally independent/orthogonal concepts in this KEP (I tried to capture that in the last paragraph of the "Motivation" section). E.g. in case of RDT there cannot be such a thing as a sandbox-level class because of hw-limitations (it's a flat one-level hierarchy).

Makes sense?

}

+// ClassResourceName is the name of a QoS-class resource.
+type ClassResourceName string
```

Also, we add a `Resources` field to the `PodSpec`. We will re-use the existing
`ResourceRequirements` type but Limits and Requests must be left empty. Classes
may be set and they represent the Pod-level assignment of QoS-class resources,
comparable to the PodClassResources message in PodSandboxConfig in the CRI API.

```diff
 type PodSpec struct {
@@ -224,4 +224,8 @@ type PodSpec struct {
     // Default to false.
     // +optional
     SetHostnameAsFQDN *bool `json:"setHostnameAsFQDN,omitempty" protobuf:"varint,35,opt,name=setHostnameAsFQDN"`
+    // Pod-level resources. Currently, requests and limits are not allowed
+    // to be specified for pods.
+    // +optional

> +    Resources ResourceRequirements

Reviewer 3: something that's tough here is this blurs the line between ownership of the pod cgroup between kubelet and cri. Historically, kubelet was responsible for the pod (because docker had no notion of pods). I don't think there's any way to fix this, but maybe it should be mentioned or called out?

Author: Mm, I get that. This KEP is not aiming to change that division (even though that might make sense, thinking e.g. about vm-based runtimes, but that's another story 😊). We have PodSandboxConfig in cri-api, and even resources fields in the LinuxPodSandboxConfig so it seems to get blurrier one step at a time... Fortunately, the end user (writer of the PodSpec) does not need to know the technical details where this is implemented/enforced, even though it's of course important on our side.

[KEP-2837](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1592) that is referenced below (link was broken but now fixed) is aiming to introduce a similar pod-level resources field. So these two KEPs are sort of aligned on this front.

I didn't change anything here now but could add a note e.g.:

> NOTE: Historically, kubelet has been responsible for the pod-level resources (cgroups) and container runtime has owned the container-level resources. This KEP is not directly changing that division

Or maybe something like that^ should be added to the cri-api proposal part? WDYT?

Author: resolved, as there is no pod-level `Resources` field anymore (has been replaced with `QOSResources` field)

in the key is allowed, similar to labels, e.g. `vendor/resource`.

#### Update sandbox-level QoS-class resources

Currently there is no endpoint in the CRI API to update the configuration of
pod sandboxes. In contrast, container-level resources can be updated with the
UpdateContainerResources API endpoint. In order to make container and pod
(sandbox) level QoS-class resources symmetric we want to make it possible to
update of pod-level resource assignments, too.

This will likely required a new API endpoint in CRI:

```diff
@@ -38,6 +38,8 @@ service RuntimeService {
     // RunPodSandbox creates and starts a pod-level sandbox. Runtimes must ensure
     // the sandbox is in the ready state on success.
     rpc RunPodSandbox(RunPodSandboxRequest) returns (RunPodSandboxResponse) {}
+    // UpdatePodSandboxConfig updates the configuration of an existing pod sandbox.
+    rpc UpdatePodSandboxConfig(UpdatePodSandboxConfigŔequest) returns (UpdatePodSandboxConfigŔesponse) {}
```

#### Resource status/capacity

This KEP does not speak out anything about presenting the available resource
types (or classes within) to the users.

Some alternatives for presenting this information:

> 1. Supplement `NodeStatus`

Reviewer 3: 1: should we include sig-scheduling in this conversation?
2: does it make sense to have the presentation of the information be in a later release (beta criteria, for instance)?

Author: > 1: should we include sig-scheduling in this conversation?

Definitely(!) But I think in the next implementation phase when we do something else than just cri-api changes.

> 2: does it make sense to have the presentation of the information be in a later release (beta criteria, for instance)?

Yeah, all of these (pod spec, node status etc) are **Future work**. I now tried to make this aspect more evident by mentioning *future step* in the beginning of each sub-section. The immediate changes (impl. phase 1) is just the cri-api plus annotations.

Author: resolved now as NodeStatus, PodStatus et al. are now defined and part of the first implementation phase

   +        // PodClassResrouces lists the available class resources available for pod sandboxes.
   +        PodClassResources []ClassResourceList
   +        // ContainerClassResrouces lists the available class resources available for containers.
   +        ContainerClassResources []ClassResourceList
   +
   +type ClassResourceList {
   +        // Name of the resource
   +        Name ClassResourceName
   +        // Classes available in the resource
   +        Classes []string
   +        // Immutable is set to true if the resource type does not support in-place updates
   +        Immutable bool
   +}
   ```
1. Separate API objects (e.g. something like `RuntimeClass`). Doesn't
   necessarily that neatly align with two level hierarchy (resource name and a
   set of classes within). Also, only best suited to homogenous clusters.

#### Resource discovery

Resource discovery together with resource status/capacity information (above)
enables scheduler support for QoS-class resources. This would also make it
possible to delete/evict pods from nodes when requested QoS-class resource

> types (or classes within) are no longer availab.e

Reviewer 3: nit: available*

Author: Thanks, fixed!

Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a user I want to minimize the interference of other applications to my
workload by assigning it to a class with exclusive cache allocation.

#### Story 2

As a user I want to make sure my low-priority, I/O-intensive background task
will not disturb more important workloads running on the same node.

#### Story 3

As a cluster administrator I want to throttle I/O bandwidths of certain
DaemonSets, and I want that exact throttling values depend on the SSD model in
my heterogenous cluster.

#### Story 4

As a user I want to assign a low priority task into an (RDT) class that limits
the available memory bandwidth.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

This is only the first step in getting QoS-class resources supported in

> Kubernetes. Important pieces like resource assignment via pod spec, resource

Reviewer 3: has this changed?

Author: Err, yes it has changed in the sense that we have better understanding what the complete solution would/could look like. I also have a working POC with all the future steps implemented. However, there are alternative ways to solve the future steps and not all details have been spelled out. I reworded this section and also moved non-goals that were really future steps to Goals section. WDYT?

+// resources of a pod.
+message PodClassResources {
+    // QoS-class resource assignment of the pod.
+    // Key is the resource type and values is the class name within the resource type.
+    map<string, string> class = 1;
+}
```

Also, define "known" QoS-class resource types to more easily align container
runtime implementations:

```diff
+
+const (
+       // ClassResourceRdt is the name of the RDT QoS-class resource
+       ClassResourceRdt = "rdt"
+       // ClassResourceBlockio is the name of the blockio QoS-class resource
+       ClassResourceBlockio = "blockio"
+)
```

### Pod annotations

Use Pod annotation as the initial K8s user interface, similar to e.g. how
seccomp support was added. This will bridge the gap between enabling
QoS-class resources in the CRI protocol and making them available in the Pod
spec.

A feature gate ClassResources enables kubelet to look for pod
annotations and set the QoS-class resource assignment via CRI protocol accordingly.

Specifically, kubelet will support annotations for specifying RDT and blockio
class, the two types of QoS-class resources that already have basic support in the
container runtimes.

>   class for all containers

Reviewer 3: I'm confused .above you mention we'll change the cri message to include a Resources field, but down here you're saying we'll use annotations?

Author: Above, we introduce these new fields in the CRI API but PodSpec is still missing. Pod annotations interpreted by kubelet would serve as the "phase 1 user interface".

Author: no annotations anymore in the proposal -> "resolved"

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

Yes it can.

Implementation Phase 1: In this phase pod annotations are used as the user
interface for assigning QoS-class resources to workloads. Existing
running workloads continue to work without any changes as their QoS-class
resource assigment in the runtime is not changed.
Restarting or re-deploying a workload causes it to lose its QoS-class resource
assignment as the annotation parsing in kubelet is disabled. In other words,
the workload is able to run but the QoS-class resource assignment request from

> the user (via pod annotations) is effectively ignored.

Reviewer 8: effectively?

Author: Reworded to
`...QoS-class resource assignment requests from the user, i.e. via pod annotations, are ignored by kubelet.`

Future implementation phases: running workloads continue to work without any
changes. Restarting or re-deploying a workload causes it to fail as the

> requested QoS-class resources are not available.

Reviewer 8: ? clarify pls why the resources are not available after restart.. and how the annotations are disabled by kubelet.. filtered out?

Author: I reworded this a bit. If featuregate is disabled kubelet will simply ignore the annotations.

Author: Marking as resolved as we don't even have annotations in the proposal anymore

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

Implementation Phase 1: workloads need to be restarted to re-evaluate the pod
annotations to correctly communicate QoS-class resource assignments to the
container runtime.

Future implementation phases: workloads might have failed because of
unsupported fields in the pod spec resource requirements and need to be

> restarted.

Reviewer 8: "future" pod annotation updates on pod/container.. or is future for first class CRI fields managed by k8s services..

Author: Sorry I didn't quite get this quesion 🧐 I changed the text slightly

```
Future implementation phases: workloads might have failed because of
unsupported fields in the pod spec and need to be restarted.
```

**_Implementation phase 1_** is the one where we update cri-api and use annotations for controlling the assignment. **_Future implementation phases_** is everything after that where we have support in PodSpec and eventually in scheduler etc

Author: resolved as annotations are not there anymore

of resources, i.e. QoS-class resources.

[Intel RDT][intel-rdt] implements a class-based mechanism for controlling the
cache and memory bandwidth QoS of applications. All processes in the same
hardware class share a portion of cache lines and memory bandwidth. RDT
provides a way for mitigating noisy neighbors and fulfilling SLAs. In Linux
control happens via resctrl -- a pseudo-filesystem provided by the kernel which
makes it virtually agnostic of the hardware architecture. The OCI runtime-spec
has supported Intel RDT for a while already. Other hardware vendors have
comparable technologies which use the same [resctrl interface][linux-resctrl].

The Linux Block IO controller parameters depend very heavily on the underlying
hardware and system configuration (device naming/numbering, IO scheduler
configuration etc) which makes it very impractical to control from the Pod spec
level. In order to hide this complexity the concept of blockio classes has been
added to the container runtimes (CRI-O and containerd). A system administrator
is able to configure blockio controller parameters on per-class basis and the
classes are then made available for CRI clients. Following this model also

> provies a possible framework for the future improvements, for instance enabling

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
provides a possible framework for the future improvements, for instance enabling
```

Author: Thx! Fixed

class-based network or memory type prioritization of applications.

Currently, there is no mechanism in Kubernetes to use these types of resources.
CRI-O and containerd runtimes have support for RDT and blockio classes and they
provide an bridge-gap user interface through special pod annotations. We would
like to eventually get these types of resources first class citizen and
properly supported in Kubernetes, providing visibility, a well-defined user
interface, and permission controls.

It seems necessary to support both container-level and pod-level QoS-class
resources as independent concepts. Intel RDT (above) is per-container by
design because of the hardware implementation (the control/class hiearchy is
flat). Also, the current support for blockio is container-level only (it is not
possible to configure pod sandbox-level cgroup parameters). However, having

> pod-level QoS-class resources makes it possible to implement support for

Reviewer 9: Is it worth seperating this part from the feature?

Author: Sorry, I didn't quite understand your comment. Separating which part from which feature?

Reviewer 9: > Sorry, I didn't quite understand your comment. Separating which part from which feature?

runtime which causes the corresponding CRI RuntimeService request (e.g.
RunPodSandbox or CreateContainer) to fail with an error.

This phase would likely also wire QoS-class resources to
[In-place pod vertical scaling](#1287), allowing updates of running containers.

Input validation of classes very similar to labels is implemented: keys
(`ClassResourceName`) and values must be non-empty, less than 64 characters
long, must start and end with an alphanumeric character and may contain only
alphanumeric characters, dashes, underscores or dots (`-`, `_` or `.`).
Similar to labels, a namespace prefix (FQDN subdomain separated with a slash)
in the key is allowed, similar to labels, e.g. `vendor/resource`.

#### Update sandbox-level QoS-class resources

This future step would be a second extesion to the CRI API.

Currently there is no endpoint in the CRI API to update the configuration of
pod sandboxes. In contrast, container-level resources can be updated with the
UpdateContainerResources API endpoint. In order to make container and pod
(sandbox) level QoS-class resources symmetric we want to make it possible to
update of pod-level resource assignments, too.

> This will likely required a new API endpoint in CRI:

Reviewer 9: nit: require

?

Author: Thanks, fixed

runtime implementations:

```diff
+
+const (
+       // ClassResourceRdt is the name of the RDT QoS-class resource
+       ClassResourceRdt = "rdt"
+       // ClassResourceBlockio is the name of the blockio QoS-class resource
+       ClassResourceBlockio = "blockio"
+)
```

### Pod annotations

Use Pod annotation as the initial K8s user interface, similar to e.g. how
seccomp support was added. This will bridge the gap between the first
implementation phase, i.e. enabling QoS-class resources in the CRI protocol,
and the future work which makes them available in the Pod spec. Kubelet will
read the specific Pod annotations and translate them into corresponding fields
in the CRI messages.

A feature gate ClassResources enables kubelet to look for pod
annotations and set the QoS-class resource assignment via CRI protocol accordingly.

Specifically, kubelet will support annotations for specifying RDT and blockio
class, the two types of QoS-class resources that already have basic support in the
container runtimes.

  class for all containers
- `rdt.resources.alpha.kubernetes.io/default` for setting a Pod-level default RDT
  class for all containers

> - `rdt.resources.alpha.kubernetes.io/container.<container-name>` for

Author: > initcontainer as its name can be equal to container's name.

No it cannot, init containers cannot have same names as "normal" containers

possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

Add support to Kubernetes for declaring _quality-of-service_ resources, and
assigning these to Pods. A quality-of-service (QoS-class) resource is similar
to other Kubernetes resource types (i.e. native resources such as `cpu` and
`memory` or extended resources) because you can assign that resource to a
particular container. However, QoS-class resources are also different from

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Author: Basically, yes. But in this case "thoughtful" resource management is especially a responsibility of the cluster/node administrator. @mikebrow  would you like something about this to be mentioned in here?

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Reviewer 10: As I understand it, a QoS-class resource that is unbounded and anyone can claim their usage.  If every pod on a node all requested the same QoS-class resource, the contract implies they all can get it!  This could mean its restricted to compressible resources, but it is not necessarily providing any banding across those resources....

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Reviewer 8: yes, I think these additional comments and derek's should be included in some form

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Author: > a QoS-class resource that is unbounded and anyone can claim their usage. If every pod on a node all requested the same QoS-class resource, the contract implies they all can get it! 

This is true. I think typically the QoS-class resources would be used for throttling, not for providing any guaranteed performance (e.g. in general you can't promise a certain memory bw but you can set limits)

I felt this detail wouldn't belong in the summary. I added to the Proposal section the following paragraph:

*QoS-class resources are unbounded in the way that any number of applications can request the same class (of the same QoS-class resource). QoS-class resources typically represent some throttling mechanism - in this case for example, if all (or most of) applications request the highest-tier class all of these applications get the same level of service. Future work on [access control(#access-control) will provide mechanisms to limit what QoS-class resources (or classes) are available to users.*

WDYT?

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Reviewer 8: sgtm

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Author: > QoS-class resource that is unbounded and anyone can claim their usage. If every pod on a node all requested the same QoS-class resource, the contract implies they all can get it!

@derekwaynecarr @mikebrow regarding the unbounded nature in the latest iteration I now added discussion about "class capacity" in the open questions. So if people want it (and don't get confused) I think it can be added into the APIs relatively easily (i.e. a mechanism to limit the usage of certain classes). Any take on this?

> those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,

Author: @mikebrow as per the comments above marking this as resolved

rather than to declare a specific amount of capacity that is allocated.

Main characteristics of the new resource type (and the technologies they are
aimed at enabling) are:

- multiple containers can be assigned to the same class of a certain type of
  resource

> - resources are represented by a limited set of class identifiers

Reviewer 8: this could have different meanings, why is the set of class identifiers for resources limited?  limited in what ways..

Author: My bad English... meant that there is a finite known set. Changed to **enumerable**. Better?

Reviewer 8: that works..

> - each type of resource has its own set of class identifiers

Reviewer 8: for consistency do you want to call these QoS-classes, QoS-class resources, classes, class identifiers, or opaque qos-class identifiers...   some of the description seems repetitive

> - each type of resource has its own set of class identifiers

Author: They don't need to be unique over all QoS-class resources types. Changed wording to **individual**

This paragraph/list merely tries to describe the properties of the practical technologies that could be enabled by by the new type of QoS-class resources in Kubernetes. Changed the wording to explicitly **QoS-class resource** here as well.

> - each type of resource has its own set of class identifiers

Reviewer 8: kk changes are good thx

With QoS-class resources, Pods and their containers can request

> opaque QoS-class identifiers (classes) for some particular mechanism

Author: Changed to "certain QoS mechanism". Better?

It is sort of "vague" as it is about enabling any "compatible" QoS mechanism.

> (QoS-class resource type), such as block I/O bandwidth. Kubelet relays this

Author: Sorry, I didn't quite get what you meant 🤔 Let's keep it general to reduce confusion: I removed mention of blockio (or bandwidth) here. Better?

> (QoS-class resource type), such as block I/O bandwidth. Kubelet relays this

Reviewer 8: good this comment was also tied to the particular mechanism comment.. qos identifier for resource type is well scoped :-)

information to the container runtime which is responsible for enforcing the

> request in the underlying system.

Author: What I try to state here that runtime is supposed to do something with the information ("enforcement" is out-of-scope of kubelet). Is this better?

> request in the underlying system.

Reviewer 8: nod like that better .. mention that kubelet relays to the container runtime without directing how / requirements on the underlying system here.. we could do that if needed on the cri api that the class be enforced through some mechanism, e.g. underlying.

> request in the underlying system.

Author: I'm not sure if I got all of that 🤔I now changed this to

*Kubelet relays this information to the container runtime, without directing how the request is enforced in the underlying system.* 

I'm not entirely satisfied but you can suggest something better...

> request in the underlying system.

Author: @mikebrow I'm marking this as resolved

A prime example of a QoS-class resource is Intel RDT (Resource Director
Technology). RDT is a technology for controlling the cache lines and memory

> bandwidth available to applications.

Reviewer 8: or just remove the paragraph since it's discussed below

> bandwidth available to applications.

Author: Removed

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

This enhancement proposal aims at improving the quality of service of

> applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control

Author: Changed as suggested.

> applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control

Author: How come "well known"?

> applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control

Reviewer 8: qos-class resource control isn't so much a new thing... as it is a well known type of resource control.. that is being re-introduced in this space...

> applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control

Author: Hmm, I'm still a bit lost here. **Re-** introducing to me sounds like something was there before but was later removed and now we're bringing it back. Also, I think that *QoS* is generally a well known concept but *QoS-class resources* is something new in K8s  

Changed to:

*This enhancement proposal aims at improving the quality of service of applications by implementing a new type of resource control mechanism in Kubernetes.*

but I don't know if that's any better

> applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control

Reviewer 8: introducing ... making available..

> applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control

Author: "making available" sounds good, now changed the sentence to:

*This enhancement proposal aims at improving the quality of service of applications by making available a new type of resource control mechanism in Kubernetes.*

WDYT?

> applications in Kubernetes by introducing a new type of resource control

Author: @mikebrow I'm marking this as resolved

mechanism. Certain types of resources are inherently shared by application (e.g.
cache, memory bandwidth and disk I/O) and while there are technologies for
controlling these, there is currently no meaningful way in Kubernetes to

> support those tehcnologies. This proposal suggests to address the issue above

Author: Hmm, I wouldn't say it's about sharing the resources. If you think about cache, mem bw or disk i/o they are shared already by different applications. But there is no control how they are shared. And that is what QoS-class resources try to address: enable tecnologies/mecnanisms to control how these shared resources are actually shared.

> support those tehcnologies. This proposal suggests to address the issue above

Reviewer 8: nod.. "to support QoS-class based sharing of those types of resources."

> support those tehcnologies. This proposal suggests to address the issue above

Author: I didn't want to talk about QoS-classes here, yet. I wanted to point out that there are resource control mechanisms that K8s cannot support, currently. Then, in the following sentences/paragraphs it is suggested to solve this gap with "QoS-class resources". I reworded the text now to:

*Certain types of resources are inherently shared by applications, e.g. cache, memory bandwidth and disk I/O. While there are technologies for controlling how these resources are shared between applications, there is currently no meaningful way to support these technologies in Kubernetes.*

What do you think, makes better sense?

> support those tehcnologies. This proposal suggests to address the issue above

Reviewer 8: sgtm

in a generalized way by extending the Kubernetes resource model with a new type
of resources, i.e. QoS-class resources.

This KEP identifies two technologies that can immediately be enabled with
QoS-class resources. However, these are just two examples  and the proposed
changes are generic (and not tied to these two QoS-class resource types in any

> way), making it easy to implement new QoS-class resource types in the runtimes

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
way), making it easier to implement new QoS-class resource types.
```

Author: Changed as suggested.

> without any changes in Kubernetes.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
```

Author: Dropped as suggested.

[Non-goals](#non-goals).

#### Pod Spec

This future step will replace pod annotations with proper user interface via
the Pod spec. Below, one possible option is presented.

Introduce a new field (e.g. class) into ResourceRequirements of Container.

```diff
// ResourceRequirements describes the compute resource requirements.
type ResourceRequirements struct {
     // Limits describes the maximum amount of compute resources allowed.
     Limits ResourceList `json:"limits,omitempty"
     // Requests describes the minimum amount of compute resources required.
     Requests ResourceList `json:"requests,omitempty"
+    // Classes specifies the QoS-class resources that the container should be assigned
+    Classes map[ClassResourceName]string
}

+// ClassResourceName is the name of a QoS-class resource.
+type ClassResourceName string
```

Also, we add a `Resources` field to the `PodSpec`. We will re-use the existing
`ResourceRequirements` type but Limits and Requests must be left empty. Classes
may be set and they represent the Pod-level assignment of QoS-class resources,
comparable to the PodClassResources message in PodSandboxConfig in the CRI API.

```diff

>  type PodSpec struct {

Author: Changes to K8s API (`Pod.PodSpec`, `Node.Status` etc) are part of the future work. Phase 1 is basically about CRI API, future work about K8s API. I tried to state that more clearly in the KEP now

you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

We extend the CRI protocol to contain information about the QoS-class
resource assignment of containers and pods. Resource assignment requests will
be simple key-value pairs (*resource-type=class-name*)

Container runtime is expected to be aware of all resource types and the classes
within. The CRI protocol is extended to be able to communicate the available
QoS-class resources from the runtime to the client. This information includes:
- Available QoS-class resource types.
- Available classes within each resource type.
- Whether the resource type is immutable or if it supports in-place updates.
  In-place updates of resoures might not be possible because of runtime
  limitations or the underlying technology, for example.

Pod-level and container-level QoS-class resources are completely independent
resource types. E.g. specifying something in the pod-level request does not
mean specifying a pod-level default for all containers of the pod.

> Currently we identify two types of container-level QoS-class resources (RDT and

Reviewer 3: Is there any desire to add tests or anything to standardize behavior here? Since Kubelet is not aware, I'm not sure if there should be tests in kubernetes repo, but then again, we make the claim blockio and rdt are supported by both runtimes. If there's a future runtime, would a user expect those to work? In other words, are these class resources an implicit requirement of CRI conformance? I'm fine if we put that in open questions

Reviewer 8: agree and is probably a next phase item..

Author: > Is there any desire to add tests or anything to standardize behavior here? Since Kubelet is not aware, I'm not sure if there should be tests in kubernetes repo, but then again, we make the claim blockio and rdt are supported by both runtimes. If there's a future runtime, would a user expect those to work? In other words, are these class resources an implicit requirement of CRI conformance? I'm fine if we put that in open questions

Good question, indeed. This is something I've been struggling a bit. I.e. what should/could we state about RDT and blockio in the KEP. In principle this (QoS-class resources) should be generic mechanism, I think. (compare e.g. to extended resources / device plugins, nothing is stated about what kind of resources should be available). OTOH, now this proposal states that we would add some consts (`rdt` and `blockio`) to k8s.io/cri-api 🙃

Also, the API changes are platform agnostic (as @sftim just commented in #3008) but the currently available "qos-class resource implementations" in runtimes are platform-specific. Especially blockio seems very unlikely to see a Windows implementation.

Thus, I'd be inclined to keep rdt and blockio out of the specification in any way. Just use them as practical examples. WDYT?

Author: This should be now resolved by the "official" well-known QoS resource names that will be specified in the API at later phase

Author: @haircommander marking this as resolved

style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

Add support to Kubernetes for declaring _quality-of-service_ resources, and
assigning these to Pods. A quality-of-service (QoS-class) resource is similar
to other Kubernetes resource types (i.e. native resources such as `cpu` and
`memory` or extended resources) because you can assign that resource to a
particular container. However, QoS-class resources are also different from
those other resources because they are used to assign a _class identifier_,
rather than to declare a specific amount of capacity that is allocated.

Main characteristics of the new resource type (and the technologies they are
aimed at enabling) are:

- multiple containers can be assigned to the same class of a certain type of
  QoS-class resource
- QoS-class resources are represented by an enumerable set of class identifiers
- each type of QoS-class resource has an independent set of class identifiers

> With QoS-class resources, Pods and their containers can request opaque

Reviewer 10: The difference between a RuntimeClass and a QoS-class is basically that a RuntimeClass implies a union of common behavior across a variety of dimensions and the goal with QoS-class is to allow a attribute specific mechanism that we trust when unioned together will work well?

Author: > QoS-class is to allow a attribute specific mechanism that we trust when unioned together will work well?

Basically yes. It would be assumed that there are no overlapping QoS-class resources for controlling "the same thing". SImilarly that you wouldn't expect two co-exiting device plugins to manage the same devices.

multiple phases, building functionality gradually, step-by-step. The goal is to
make the discussions more focused and easier. We may also learn on the way,
insights from earlier phases affecting design choises made in the later phases,
hopefully resulting in a better overall end result. However, we also outline
all the future steps to not lose the overall big picture.

The figure below illustrates the design of the full implementation (less quota)
and the division of implementation phases. The first implementation phase
basically covers the communication between kubelet and the container runtime
(i.e. CRI API). All changes to the Kubernetes API and its control plane
components are left to future work. This KEP (the [Proposal](#proposal) and
[Design Details](#design-details)) in its current form implements this first
phase – the KEP will evolve and be supplemented with future phases getting
implemented.

![design](./design.svg)

In the current design QoS-class resources are designed to be opaque to the CRI
client in the sense that the container runtime takes care of configuration and
control of the resources and the classes within.

> ### Phase 1

Reviewer 10: If the end-to-end design can be implemented via annotations alone, can we flesh this concept out further outside of Kubernetes?  Once we see successful application of the concept, we can then explore the API changes (phase 2+) with more known/known use cases that would benefit?  It feels like phase 2+ is where the KEP intersects more with Kubernetes itself.

Author: I don't know what to say. We have explored this outside Kubernetes and there are customers using this experimental runtime-specific mechanism (for RDT and blockio).

E.g. regarding RDT: OCI runtime spec supports it, runtimes support it -> I think the question should be how Kubernetes should support it. It could be e.g. decicate field (say `RdtClass`) in CRI and PodSpec et at. However, we thought this is too short-sighted as we could see the need for other similar "QoS resources". Thus, in this proposal we suggest a generic mechanism to support all these. But that can be questioned, of course

The goal is to enable a bare minimum for users to leverage QoS-class resources
and start experimenting with them in Kubernetes:

> - extend the CRI protocol to allow QoS-class resource assignment and updates to

Reviewer 5: I am not sure why we need the CRI changes for phase 1. It can be done just with annotations.

Author: Thanks @mrunalp. Do you mean 
1. Use pod annotations that would be interpreted by the runtime(s). I.e. we would specify annotations in `api/core/v1/` and those would be entirely handled by the runtime.
2. **OR** Use container annotations instead of CRI. I.e. pod annotations would be interpreted by kubelet and "translated" to corresponding container annotations.

I think the CRI changes are not mandatory, we can have some level of support with annotations alone. Advantages of bringing in CRI changes would be e.g.
- better "UX"
  - better error messages as kubelet can do input validation, e.g.. reject pod if requested QoS-class resource is not available
  - wrt option 1 above, being able to reject changes to the annotations of running pods (keep annotations in sync with the actual assignment)
- CRI could be used to communicate the pod qos class explicitly to the runtime (this is currently called out in open questions section). Could be used to eliminate quessing of the pod qos class e.g. in [cri-o](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/blob/edf889bd277ae9a8aa699c354f12baaef3d9b71d/internal/runtimehandlerhooks/high_performance_hooks.go#L223)
- prepare runtimes early on ("full" support would be available when K8s api changes are landing)

Author: @mrunalp I'm resolving this comment as outdated as this aspect of the proposal has completely changed (no annotations anymore)

marked as `provisional` is a working document and subject to change. You can
denote sections that are under active debate as follows:

```
<<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
Stuff that is being argued.
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

When editing KEPS, aim for tightly-scoped, single-topic PRs to keep discussions
focused. If you disagree with what is already in a document, open a new PR
with suggested changes.

One KEP corresponds to one "feature" or "enhancement" for its whole lifecycle.
You do not need a new KEP to move from beta to GA, for example. If
new details emerge that belong in the KEP, edit the KEP. Once a feature has become
"implemented", major changes should get new KEPs.

The canonical place for the latest set of instructions (and the likely source
of this file) is [here](/keps/NNNN-kep-template/README.md).

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable`, or significant changes once
it is marked `implementable`, must be approved by each of the KEP approvers.
If none of those approvers are still appropriate, then changes to that list
should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or
SIG Architecture for cross-cutting KEPs).
-->

> # [KEP-3008](#3008): QoS-class resources

Author: It's the same, right? I.e. **QoS-class resources**

Or do you mean dropping the **KEP-NNNN:** part? But that's even in the template 🤔

> # [KEP-3008](#3008): QoS-class resources

Reviewer 7: Ah, I was thinking about the match with the path `sig-node/3008-cri-class-based-resources/`. Maybe it's that path that needs to change?

> # [KEP-3008](#3008): QoS-class resources

Author: Ach yes, good point. Renamed to `keps/sig-node/3008-qos-class-resources/`

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

> Implementation phase 1: No.

Reviewer 6: Surely there will be a unit test of some sort for the feature gate? Is there some test we can do to show that it can be disabled?

In other words, nobody should ever answer "No" to this question - it's more like a checkpoint than a real question :)

Author: Yes, this was a slight omission on my part 🙄 I now added a mention about kubelet unit tests.
